✅ Step 0: Prerequisites
Before starting, make sure you have Node.js installed. You can download it from nodejs.org.

💻 Part 1: Setting Up SQL Server
This involves installing the free SQL Server Express and its management tool.

Install SQL Server Express:

Go to the SQL Server Express download page and download the installer (the "Basic" package is fine).

Run the installer you just downloaded. Follow the default settings, which will install a "default instance" named SQLEXPRESS. This will also install the SQL Server database engine service.

When you get to the Database Engine Configuration screen, select "Mixed Mode" authentication. This lets you log in with either Windows or SQL Server accounts.

You'll be asked to set a password for the sa (system administrator) account. Choose a strong password and write it down (you'll need it later).

Install SQL Server Management Studio (SSMS):

Download the latest SSMS from the Microsoft SSMS download page.

Run the installer and follow the prompts to install the management tool.

Create the Database:

Open SQL Server Management Studio (SSMS) from your Start menu.

In the "Connect to Server" window, enter your server name (e.g., localhost\SQLEXPRESS or just . if using a default instance) and click "Connect".

Once connected, click "New Query" at the top.

Copy the entire SQL script I provided earlier and paste it into the new query window.

Click the "Execute" button (or press F5) to run the script. This will create your NUST_Venue_Booking database, tables, and sample data.

Enable TCP/IP Connections (Crucial for Node.js):

Open SQL Server Configuration Manager. You can find it by searching for it in the Start menu.

In the left panel, go to SQL Server Network Configuration > Protocols for SQLEXPRESS.

In the right panel, right-click TCP/IP and select Enable.

Right-click TCP/IP again and select Properties. Go to the IP Addresses tab.

Scroll down to the IPAll section. Clear the value for TCP Dynamic Ports (if there's a 0 in it). Set the TCP Port to 1433. Click OK to save.

Restart SQL Server & Configure Firewall:

In SQL Server Configuration Manager, click SQL Server Services in the left panel.

Right-click SQL Server (SQLEXPRESS) in the right panel and select Restart.

To allow Node.js to connect, open Windows Firewall and allow inbound connections for port 1433 for both TCP and UDP protocols.

💻 Part 2: Setting Up the Backend (Node.js)
Now you'll set up the Node.js server that connects your website to the database.

Create a Project Folder:

Create a new folder on your computer, for example, nust-venue-backend.

Create package.json:

Inside your new folder, create a file named package.json. Open it in a text editor (like Notepad), paste the following code exactly, and save the file:

json
{
  "name": "nust-venue-backend",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "main": "server.js",
  "scripts": {
    "start": "node server.js"
  },
  "dependencies": {
    "express": "^4.18.2",
    "mssql": "^10.0.1",
    "cors": "^2.8.5",
    "body-parser": "^1.20.2"
  }
}
Create server.js:

In the same folder, create another file named server.js.

Open it and paste the entire server.js code I provided earlier. Don't forget to update the database configuration section with your SQL Server details (server name, your SQL username, and password).

Open a Command Prompt / Terminal:

In the folder where you created package.json and server.js, open a command prompt.

To open it here, you can type cmd in the folder's address bar and press Enter.

Install Dependencies:

In the command prompt, type the following command and press Enter. This will install all the necessary packages listed in your package.json.

bash
npm install
Start the Server:

After the installation is complete, type the following command and press Enter to start your backend server.

bash
node server.js
You should see a message in the terminal saying Server running on http://localhost:5000 and Connected to SQL Server. If you see errors, double-check your SQL Server configuration and credentials in server.js.

💻 Part 3: Connecting the Frontend
The final step is to ensure your website's code knows where to find the backend.

Update index.html:

Open the index.html file I provided.

Look for the line near the top of the <script> section that says:

javascript
const API_BASE = "http://localhost:5000/api";
Make sure the address (http://localhost:5000) matches the port your backend is running on. The default is 5000.

Open the Website:

Open your index.html file in your web browser. You can simply double-click the file.

Test the Login:

On the Login page, try the demo accounts (e.g., admin1/password123, staff_john/password123) or register a new user. If the setup was successful, you will be able to log in and your actions (like booking a venue) will be saved to the database.

⚙️ Troubleshooting Common Issues
Login fails with "Login failed for user...": This usually means the authentication mode is wrong. Make sure you enabled Mixed Mode during SQL Server setup.

Node.js can't connect to SQL Server: This is often a TCP/IP issue. Double-check that you enabled the TCP/IP protocol and set the port to 1433 in SQL Server Configuration Manager.

"Cannot find module..." error when running node server.js: You forgot to run npm install. Make sure you run it in the correct folder before starting the server.
